---
    title: July 15, 2024
    aka: So many currants, beautifulpests, and baby pawpaws
    layout: post
---

## Notes
- [Rose of Sharon will root readily in water](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c3SOORRNuYw), making it a great candidate for easy propagation
- Young pawpaws / pawpaw seedlings
  - Seem to be a target of small, stealthy pests, which is tough when there are so few leaves
  - Some seeds are just sprouting now, as late as mid-July
- Pests!
  - Pocket gophers... how do you deal?
  - Japanese beetles
    - If you're hand-picking, [watch for the tiny white eggs near their heads](https://extension.umd.edu/sites/extension.umd.edu/files/styles/optimized/public/2021-02/HGIC_insects_tachinidflyeggs_japanesebeetle_400_1.jpg?itok=CZXlCDvh). This is a good sign that Tachinid flies (a family of native parasitic flies) have targeted them. These eggs will hatch into fly larvae which will eat the beetles from the inside out. Hopefully before they get a chance to breed. Consider saving the beetles with those eggs on them.
    - The damage looks like laced leaves
    - They seem to be slower/easier to capture in the morning
  - Raspberry cane borers kill the tips of new canes by chewing a very straight line across the stem
    - Looks like it was cut by clippers
    - To get rid of them, you're supposed to cut a few inches below the damage to be sure you've got them out
  - Squash vine borers
    - While the moths are fucking cool-looking, they're laying eggs on your squash stems, and the larva will eat those stems
    - Apparently, you can bury other parts of your squash stems so they root in different spots, mitigating the borer damage. Anyone tried this?

## Resources
- We've spoken a bit about stool layering, and our very own Lally Luck just put out a very informative video on the BECKY system to encourage layering using recycled nursery pots
- [The reference manual of woody plant propagation : from seed to tissue culture : a practical working guide to the propagation of over 1100 species, varieties, and cultivars](https://archive.org/details/referencemanualo0000dirr)